After all these if statements which are extremely important, which is why I spend so much time on them
because you will basically need them in any program you write, so after the if statements,
it's now time to come to another very important construct in Javascript and in actually any programming
language and that would be loops. In programming, you often have the scenario that you need to execute
certain code multiple times.
Now you might think okay we have functions for that, we can have reusable code in there, we can call a function
multiple times.
Sure
but in your code, you have to write every function execution, right?
Of course you can attach a function to an event listener and then whenever that button for example is
clicked, the function executes
but if you want to control that a certain snippet of code runs for every item you have in an array or
runs ten times, then you would have to put ten function executions for example into your code and loops
allow you to write such code repetition in a more dynamic and flexible way.
Now in Javascript, we have four main loops and that's the for loop, the for/of loop, the for/in loop
and the while loop and for the while loop, we also have one variation which I'll also show you.
Now what's the idea behind each of these loops and when do you use them? The for loop together with the
while loop is the oldest loop, it's been in Javascript forever and the for loop allows you to execute
code a certain amount of times and you use a counter variable for that which you typically increment
or change with every loop iteration.
So that means that with a for loop, you can easily define that a certain part of your code should run
10 times, 20 times, a million times. Here's an example,
this is how for loop looks like, you have the for keyword, then between parentheses you initialize or
you set up that loop and that consists of three parts - a begin phase where you initialize variables you
can use inside of that loop,
so between these curly braces and that's important, the variable set up there are really only available
inside of the loop,
then we also have separated by a semicolon,
so not by a comma, not by colon but a semicolon,
we have a condition, an exit condition which basically defines when we stop executing that code between
the curly braces and then we have, separated by another semicolon,
the code that should run after every loop iteration and there, you could do whatever you want but typically,
you just change that variable which you initialized and which you also use in your exit condition.
So this loop for example would initialize i and i is a name which is often chosen, it stands for iterator,
so you choose i and you set it to 0 initially,
then after every loop iteration,
so after this console log body ran, it's incremented by 1 and then before the next loop iteration,
before every loop iteration actually, this condition i smaller three is checked and the loop body
is only executed if that condition yields true which of course means that in this example here, we would
print the values 0, 1 and 2 but never 3 because after the third loop iteration, i gets incremented
to three, before the next iteration this condition checks if i is smaller than three which of course is
not the case if i is equal to three and therefore it would stop executing that and move to the next line
of code after that for loop,
that's how a for loop works and of course, needless to say, we'll see that in action right after this
lecture. Now another loop you have which is a bit newer but now also very well supported in Javascript
and that's the for/of loop. Now that executes for every element in an array, it allows you to execute
code for every element in an array.
It looks like this, kind of like the first for loop but a bit different, between the parentheses we don't
have these three parts, instead here we have the
of keyword and we create a constant, could also be a variable but typically you create a constant which
gives you access to one element of the array at a time and then this body between the curly braces is
executed for every element in the array and l in this case then refers to that element in the array
for this current iteration
and this is convenient for for example doing something with every element in the array or outputting
it to the console or whatever you want to do.
Now for/of helps you with arrays, we also have for/in and that allows you to execute code for every
key in an object.
This is how it looks like
and there we basically have the same syntax as in a for/of loop but with the in keyword instead of
the of keyword and an important difference is that for of is built to work with arrays, for/in is built
to work with objects and there, you get access to every key in the object,
so that's the part on the left side of the colon when you create these key-value pairs and objects
and then this second line you see here, console log object, square brackets key, that's actually
a syntax we haven't used before,
this is a way of dynamically accessing key-value pairs in an object when you don't have the key name but
instead you have a variable or a constant that holds the key name,
then this gives you dynamic access to the values stored for that key in the object and of course, we'll
also see that in action in this module. Now last but not least, we have the while loop.
The idea behind the while loop is that you execute code as long as a certain condition is true and only
if that condition is somehow set to false, you exit out of the loop.
It looks like this,
the idea here basically is that you don't really work with a counter, though you could also do that
here if you check the counter in your condition but that you maybe have some boolean which you then
change at some point of time inside of your while loop and you can continue executing code until this
is done.
So these are the different loops,
let's now have a look at them and see how we can integrate them into our project or generally work with
them.